# 6.1810 Tools Setup Guide

For this class you'll need the RISC-V versions of QEMU 7.2+, GDB 8.3+, GCC, and Binutils.

If you are having trouble getting things set up, please come to office hours or post on Piazza. We're happy to help!


## Debian / Ubuntu

```bash
sudo apt-get install git build-essential gdb-multiarch qemu-system-misc gcc-riscv64-linux-gnu binutils-riscv64-linux-gnu
```

> **Note**: You'll likely need to be running Ubuntu 24 (or later) in order for `apt-get` to install a recent enough QEMU.


## Arch Linux

```bash
sudo pacman -S riscv64-linux-gnu-binutils riscv64-linux-gnu-gcc riscv64-linux-gnu-gdb qemu-emulators-full bc git base-devel
```


## Windows

Students running Windows are encouraged to either install Linux on their local machine or use **WSL 2** (Windows Subsystem for Linux 2).

We also encourage students to install the **Windows Terminal** tool in lieu of using PowerShell or Command Prompt.

### Setting Up WSL 2

1. Make sure you have the Windows Subsystem for Linux installed
2. Add **Ubuntu 24.04** from the Microsoft Store
3. Launch Ubuntu and interact with the machine

> **Important**: Make sure that you are running version 2 of WSL. WSL 1 does not work with the 6.1810 labs. To check, run the following in a Windows terminal:
> ```
> wsl -l -v
> ```

### Installing the Required Software

```bash
$ sudo apt-get update && sudo apt-get upgrade
$ sudo apt-get install git build-essential gdb-multiarch qemu-system-misc gcc-riscv64-linux-gnu binutils-riscv64-linux-gnu
```

From Windows, you can access all of your WSL files under the `\\wsl$\` directory. For instance, the home directory for an Ubuntu 20.04 installation should be at:

```
\\wsl$\Ubuntu-20.04\home\<username>\
```


## Running a Linux VM

If you're running an operating system on which it's not convenient to install the RISC-V tools, you may find it useful to run a Linux virtual machine (VM) and install the tools in the VM.

### Step 1: Get a Virtualization Platform

We suggest **VirtualBox** (free for Mac, Linux, and Windows).

### Step 2: Get a Linux Disk Image

**Ubuntu Desktop** is one option. This will download a file named something like `ubuntu-20.04.3-desktop-amd64.iso`. Start up your virtualization platform, create a new 64-bit virtual machine, and use the Ubuntu image as a boot disk.


## macOS

### Step 1: Install Developer Tools

```bash
$ xcode-select --install
```

### Step 2: Install Homebrew

```bash
$ /bin/bash -c "$(curl -fsSL https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Homebrew/install/HEAD/install.sh)"
```

### Step 3: Install the RISC-V Compiler Toolchain

```bash
$ brew tap riscv/riscv
$ brew install riscv-tools
```

If you encounter the following error:

```
Error: Refusing to load formula riscv/riscv/riscv-tools from untrusted tap riscv/riscv.
```

This occurs because Homebrew does not trust third-party taps by default. Run the following commands to authorize and complete the installation:

```bash
# 1. Trust the tap
brew trust riscv/riscv

# 2. Reinstall riscv-tools
brew install riscv-tools
```

The installation involves compiling multiple components and may take a while. Please be patient.

> The brew formula may not link into `/usr/local`. You will need to update your shell's rc file (e.g. `~/.bashrc`) to add the appropriate directory to `$PATH`:
>
> ```bash
> PATH=$PATH:/usr/local/opt/riscv-gnu-toolchain/bin
> ```

### Step 4: Install QEMU

```bash
$ brew install qemu
```


## Testing Your Installation

To test your installation, you should be able to compile and run xv6 by following the instructions in the first lab.

You can also verify your installation by running the following:

**Check QEMU version** (should be 7.2.0 or later):

```bash
$ qemu-system-riscv64 --version
QEMU emulator version 7.2.0
```

**Check GCC version** (at least one of the following should work):

```bash
$ riscv64-linux-gnu-gcc --version
riscv64-linux-gnu-gcc (Debian 10.3.0-8) 10.3.0

$ riscv64-unknown-elf-gcc --version
riscv64-unknown-elf-gcc (GCC) 10.1.0

$ riscv64-unknown-linux-gnu-gcc --version
riscv64-unknown-linux-gnu-gcc (GCC) 10.1.0
```


*Questions or comments regarding 6.1810? Send e-mail to the course staff at 61810-staff@lists.csail.mit.edu*
